---
author: Phil Whitehouse
title: 2022TV
date: 2023-01-09
description: TV
---
The dust has now settled on 2022, so here’s my top ten TV shows for 2022 - in order, then:

1. Succession. Still the best show on TV, perhaps ever. Every line is worth savouring.
2. The Bear. The one take episode (7) is some of the best TV I’ve ever seen.
3. Severance. Beautiful, majestic, and what a great cliffhanger.
4. Barry. Keeps Going from strength to strength. Rewards repeat viewings, too.
5. For All Mankind. Inventive storytelling, excellent production.
6. Peacemaker. Good clean family fun. Well, maybe my family…
7. Andor. The plaudits are right. More of the same please!
8. Strange New Worlds. Best trek since TNG. Honourable mention here for Lower Decks.
9. The Rehearsal. What the hell did I just watch? Brilliant.
10. Slow Horses. Slow burn, great performances all round.

Honorable mentions:
- Stranger Things. Thoroughly binge-worthy.
- See. Only just started Season 3, but I can already tell it’ll be a great climax to a great show.
- This is Going To Hurt. Great lil BBC comedy drama thing.
- Ghosts (UK version). Comfort food for the eyes and ears.
- Rick and Morty. Still got it. Especially loved the meta episode (“Full Meta Jackrick”)
- House of the Dragon. Nice table setting and some fab set pieces.
- Raised by Wolves. Damn shame about the cancellation.
- Westworld. Damn shame about the cancellation.
- Avenue 5. Not quite reaching Veep levels of funny, but heading in that direction.
- Handmaid’s Tale. Not quite reaching the heights of previous seasons, but still stunning.
- Better Call Saul. Haven’t got as far as the current season yet, but everyone says it’s good so better add it here, no? ¯\_(ツ)_/¯
- The Boys. Guilty pleasure.
- The Lazarus Project. Another highly bingeable show. Inventive sci-fi. Saw me through Covid.
- Undone. Hard to match the incredible Season 1, but came close.
- Wandavision / Loki. Clear daylight between these and the next best MCU TV shows.
- Oh, The Orville is good and getting better too...
